---
layout: post
title:  "JavaScript 101"
date:   2022-11-24
excerpt: "A beginner friendly guide to the basics of the javascript language."
---

JavaScript is awesome for beginning programmers.
It's a great language because it's easy to learn, and once mastered it's an excellent tool for building almost any type of website or application.
Although JavaScript comes with several frameworks to help developers build applications, these frameworks often complicate things and make the code hard to read.

Javascript was created in 1993 by Brenden Eich. 
At that time the web `1. browser` was a cutting edge technology the connected the people through the world wide web via internet.
At the beginning, the websites were completely static, built with pure `2. HTML`. 
Javascript was built as an easy to use `3. High level language`. 
Today it's arguably the most popular language in the world. 
The standard implementation of JavaScript is called `4. EchmaScript` and it's the default language in every browser. 
In fact it's the only language that runs on a browser except `5. Web Assembly`. 
But it's not the only `6. Runtime` of JavaScript. It can also run on server via NodeJS, Deno etc. 

As the name suggests, it's a `7. Scripting Language`. 
That means you can execute code by opening the console in `8. Dev tools` on your browser. 
Unlike other languages such as C, it's `9. Interpreted` and not compiled. 
Although, interpreted is not the accurate term here.
In the browser there is a `10. JS Engine` called V8 that makes JS run extremely fast but taking your code and converting it to machine code by a process called `11. Just in Time Compilation`.

To use JavaScript in a web page, you'll first need a HTML document. Inside which there will be a `12. Script Tag`. 
You can code directly inside the script tag or refer any external JS file using the `13. 'src' Attribute`.
You can print hellow world using `14. console.log` which is the built in method for printing to stdout.

```html
<html>
  <srcipt>
    console.log("hello world!")
  </script>
</html>
```
  
```html
<html>
  <script src="app.js"></script>
</html>
```

There are several different ways to define a variable in JavaScript. The most popular way today is `15. let`. It's a `16. dynamically-typed` language, so it's not neccessary to mention the type of a variable. The variables are commonly named in `17. camelCase`. Assigning a value isn't neccessary but possible.
There are seven `18. Premitive` data types. 
If we don't assign a value to a variable it automatically assigned to `19. undefined` type which is a premitive type in JS.
However we can explicitly represent an empty value using `20. null` and later on we can re-assign the same variable to a `21. string` or any other data type.
Any type that's not premitive will inherit from the `22. Object` class. We'll talk about it later.
```js
let myNumber; // undefined
myNumber = null; // null
myNumber = "eleven"; // string
myNumber = 11; // number
myNumber = new Object();
```
Here is the list of 7 premitive data types.
- string
- number
- bigint
- boolean
- undefined
- symbol
- null
